Previously on
Star Trek: Discovery...
BURNHAM: With theEnterprise
in Spacedock,
Captain Pike
andDiscovery's mission
to find any
rational explanation
for the seven signals
continues to escape me.
And with it, perhaps,
any chance
of a relationship
with my brother Spock.
Computer, show me Starfleet's
rendering of the seven signals.
Spock drew these signals
two months
before they appeared to us.
It's damn near identical.
BURNHAM:
Amanda?
: I stole
Spock's medical file.
I've been waiting for an update
on my officer, Spock.
Your guy is wanted for murder.
Killed three of his doctors,
then fled the starbase.
AMANDA: I thought
that he had left it in the past,
but it's back.
What is it?Your brother called it
the Red Angel.
That vision changed him forever.
It wasn't because of a vision.
It was because of me.What did you do?
I will find him.
No.
I will.
Got it.
TILLY: After the dark matter hit me...
It's me. ...I started to see a ghost.
Her name was May,
but she's dead.Tilly.
I am losing it, Michael.BURNHAM:
You don't need sickbay.
You need Stamets. We should have results
in one second.There he is.
That's the captain.
That's where he flies.
Just as I suspected.
You are hosting a
eukaryotic organism.A fungus?
This might hurt a bit.
Security breach by unknown
alien species in Engineering.
Engage quarantine protocol
Alpha-Omega.
Energize.
Teleporter incoming.
Captain.Welcome aboard Discovery,
Number One.
The failures cascaded
through all our primaries.
Helm, nav, both impulse
and warp drive. Chief Louvier
has an engineering team
working 'round the clock.
I don't think Enterprisewill
ever have a chief engineer
more in love with his ship.
Apparently,
Enterpriseis the only ship
in the fleet
that's had any problems.
You know, he warned me.
The damn
holographic comm system.
Tell Louvier to rip
out the entire system.
From now on we'll communicate
using good,
old-fashioned viewscreens.
Truth is I never liked
the holograms.
They look too much like ghosts.
He told you I'd say that.
No. I told him.
Cheeseburger. Fries.
Habanero sauce.You want to order
some lighter fluid with that?
That goes with the shake.
Sorry to keep you in Spacedock.
I've made use of
the time, Captain.
You've been looking into
the allegations against Spock.
It's hard to comprehend,
let alone believe,
that he murdered three people
at the psychiatric
facility on Starbase Five.
How's the crew taking it?
They don't know the details.
Only that he's in trouble.
There's something else.
Tell me.
Starfleet's classified
his case Level One.
Line officers don't usually
warrant that kind of scrutiny.
It's unprecedented. Which is why
I've done a little digging.
Sanctioned?
Better you don't know the answer
to that.
Before I look at that,
I need to know why you saw fit
to detour Federation protocols.
Something about this
investigation isn't adding up.
I'm not letting him go
without a fight.
As usual, we agree.
MALE OFFICER :
Captain Pike to the ready room.
I'm late for a briefing.
I'm glad you came.
I'm sorry you can't stay longer.
Next time.
Be careful, Captain.
You, too, Number One.
We should give it a name.
Other than May.
I know it looks like a blob,
but this is one of the most
sophisticated life-forms
I've ever encountered.
It has sentience,
intention.
Tilly, the mycelial network
doesn't just connect life.
It contains it.
It's an incubator.
You mean, like,
um... like a home?
I've been wondering why
it appeared to me as May,
which got me thinking
about the real May
that I met when I was, um, 14.
I was, um... I was a weird kid.
: You know?
Like, not a lot of friends
and nobody who really
believed in me, including me.
But... she did.
She wanted to connect to
me, and she tried so hard.
But I don't really think
I was the friend to
her that she needed.
I'm certain
you were much kinder than
you give yourself credit for.
You always are.
Thank you, but...
I didn't even know she died.
I feel like I took her
for granted.
That girl
who thought I was special.
Oh!
I've cross-referenced
what we're calling the Red Angel
with all known winged
and avian life-forms
in the Federation.
So far, I've found nothing.
Sorry.
The universal translator
sometimes has trouble
reconfiguring my lingual
clicks and pops.
My answer to you was, "Nothing
in the known universe."
Which might suggest
it's not a species.
Maybe one of a kind.A mutation.
Well, whatever it is,
figuring out how it's connected
to these signals
will help us identify it.
If only we knew what it needs.
Commander Nhan, USS Enterprise.
Glad to be here.
Welcome back aboard.
Could you pass the salt?
Commander Saru,
can you shed any light?
My apologies.
I woke up this morning fighting
an acute rhinovirus.
So you have a cold.
I had a cold last week,
which sucked.
Saurian. Six nasal canals.
It happens to the best of us,
Linus.
Everyone to your stations.
Detmer, set a course
for 108 mark four.
Maximum warp.
Aye, sir.
Mr. Saru, you look like hell.
You've been burning the candle
at both ends lately.
Go get some rest.
As you wish, sir.
Burnham. A word.
I understand your first officer
is on her way to Spacedock.
Was her visit informative?
Number One is very resourceful.
People have a tendency
to end up owing her favors.
She uncovered
some classified information
on Starbase Five.
That is the warp signature
of the shuttle
that Spock stole
from the psychiatric facility.
I put us on an intercept course.
We should reach his position
in the next few hours.
S-Sir,
after everything
that's happened,
I need to excuse myself
from seeing Spock.
Not sure I follow.
I don't want
to make things worse for him.
He's a fugitive,
whatever the circumstances.
And as Amanda suggested...
I'm probably the last person
who should insert themselves
into this problem.
I disagree.He is lost, Captain.
You are better suited
to help him.
I've thought this through.
Please, trust me.
My abiding trust in you
doesn't eclipse
the mission at hand.
Facing whatever happened
to Spock,
it's not gonna be easy
for any of us.
Reaching him
has to be the priority.
Detmer, status?
Something has grabbed us
out of warp, sir.
Speed dropping to sub-light.
Helm going unresponsive.PIKE:
Shields up.
Red alert. Owosekun,
are we talking tractor beam?
More powerful than that, sir.
I'm unable to raise shields.
Preliminary analysis indicates
a multiphasic stasis field.
It's disrupting
our shield harmonics.
DETMER: We're at
a full stop, sir.
Whatever has us,
w-we're locked into place.
Like a damn fly in a web.
And there is the spider.
BURNHAM: Starfleet has never
encountered anything like it.
565 kilometers in diameter
with a mass of 6.39 x 10 to
the 20th power kilograms.
It melds organic and
nonliving matter.
It's also ancient.
Initial scans put it
at 100,000 years old.
"Organic"?
Are you saying it's
some kind of a life-form?
Maybe it is a damn spider.
I hate spiders.
It is premature to assign
any anthropomorphic
distinction or intent.
As of yet, it hasn't
responded to any hails.
But there is this.
The sphere is vibrating.
The computer extrapolated
what it might sound like
based on the surrounding
ambient radiation.
Well, it has my ship,
and I don't know what
in the hell it wants.
Communicate with it or
disable it. And quickly, please.
BRYCE:
Captain Pike.
Saru.
COMPUTER:
Confirmed.
Did it work?
Yes. I can understand you.
DETMER: I still can't
read my controls.
I think this is Tau Cetian.
Am I the only one who bothered
to learn a foreign language?
I have localized
the backup bridge translator.
For the time being,
everyone who speaks
Earth English can communicate.
The rest of the crew and
Discovery'scomputer
are another matter.
The bridge may be
temporarily fixed, but
the virus will continue
spreading through
our comms system.
I can try purging it
from the translator's
main interface.
We have to be able to talk
to the computer
and the rest of the crew
to have any chance
of breaking free
from that sphere. Do it.
Yes, sir.
I'll go. You should stay
and monitor bridge stations.
I have placed all systems
on... automatic.
And given
our current circumstances,
you will need a translator
just to operate the turbolift.
Are you sure you can do this?We are wasting time.
We've run
a full diagnostic, Captain,
and this section
remains unaffected by the virus.
I will update you
if anything changes.
PIKE:
Thank you, Ensign.
If we can't fly this thing,
Commander,
we may have to jump away.
The spore drive
will be ready, sir.
Bring the drive online,
and then we'll couple
the shunts to me,
in case we've got
to skedaddle.
♪ Da, da, da,
da, da, da. ♪
The universal translator
for this section is no más.
Can I... help you?
Uh, unless you can reroute
the plasma regulator
to silo off the relay
junction, then,
uh, no.
You're, um...?
Jett Reno, from the Hiawatha.
I hitched a ride
off that asteroid.
Chief engineer sent me
to firewall off
the critical
propulsion systems.
I didn't realize a greenhouse
could be "critical"
or"propulsive,"
but, hmm, what do I know?
I'm just a gearhead,
not a farmer.
STAMETS:
A... farmer.
Oh, please, let us know
what you think, because we care.
You should.
Antimatter and dilithium
might be old-school,
but they don't let you down.
Why soar when you can crawl?
You don't know me, Doc.
I'm un-insultable.
Especially by a guy
who thinks he can run a ship
on mushrooms
that I pick off my pizza.
Spores are clean, renewable.
Yeah, do they come
with house dressing?
Do you have any idea
how many planets
have been ruined
by dilithium mining?
How many battles
were fought
to corner its supply?
Of course you don't.
You're one of those people
who never even consider it.
And you're one of those people
that does the ha-ha jokey thing
and then gets all huffy
and in high dudgeon
when you can't think
of a comeback.
Do you have gum?
Grape. I...
You know, it was only a
couple centuries ago that
the Earth nearly choked
to death on pollution.
Then we all woke up,
and within a generation,
everything from a
truck to a toaster...
Do you want...
Sorry. Sorry
...was covered
in solar panels.
Yesterday's solar panels
are today's fungi.
Hmm.
I can fix stuff
with duct tape,
if you want.
Do you think May had anything
to do with the sphere?
What a giant entity
from our universe
and a mycelial species
from the network?
Well, they have
as much in common
as me and that grease monkey.
I could fix that analogy
with duct tape, too.
Burnham to bridge.
The universal translator
is back up and running ship-wide
on all systems.
Saru! What is going on?
This is not just a cold.
No, it is not.
What's that hum?
Get down!
Okay, there's more
where that came from.
We've got a hundred-
giga-electron volts
surging through
the local relays.
Computer's isolated
the compartment
in order to contain the damage.
We've still got
our life support.
Yeah, but...
it could kill us.
If our oxygen ignites,
we'll cook like french fries.
Well, we could divert
the power to act like a...
a-a lightning arrestor.We could use
the door
as a ground.
Then the surge would
dissipate through the frame
of the ship.
The question is,
how do we conduct the surge
from there to there?
No, a gas could,
once it ionizes.
I infuse the spores
with an argon-xenon mixture
to slow decay.
We could link up
the canisters
to contain the gas,
our version of a lightning rod.
That's actually
not a stupid idea.
It's my version
of the house dressing,
but it saves your life.
Huh.
Bridge. What happened?
Did the sphere fire on us?
OWOSEKUN:
Negative.
EPS conduits are overloading.
Systems are going haywire.
The virus is spreading.
What is happening
to the ship?
We... have to get
to the bridge.No, no, no, no, no.
Right now
we got to get you to sickbay.
Gas her up.
Gas transference at 100%.You're gonna do that manually?
Uh, yeah,
'cause obviously you're not.
Flick the switch.
Are you okay?
I feel like
I've been hit by lightning
for the second time this week.
Reno?
Reno? Reno, are
you all right?
Weird... dream.
I was playing drums for Prince,
and there were doves
and a parade.
Okeydoke.
Wait.
It's gone.
Tilly!
She won't let...
she won't let go!
She won't let go.
What's happening to him?
I'm hoping Dr.
Pollard can tell us.
Well, comms is down, so I need
to see what the situation is
in sickbay, anyway.
POLLARD:
Triage plasma burns
on level one.
Send non-critical
to sickbay two.
PIKE:
Doctor.
POLLARD:
Bring him here.
Elevated heart rate,
spiking adrenal levels,
increased
neural activity.
The pain would render the
average humanoid unconscious.
What do we do
about those?
Nothing.
It is an effect of...
my condition.
Ocular discomfort?
No. Kelpiens can see
far deeper
into th-the light spectrum
than humans.
I keep seeing flashes
of ultraviolet light,
invisible to you, but...
quite the opposite
for me.Are these symptoms
common among Kelpiens?
This is pointless.
And the ship is being
further immobilized
as we waste time.
There is no reason to believe
the sphere is benevolent.
Now, please...
Commander.
Dr. Pollard is
trying to help you.
Yes. It is unique
to my people,
and it is terminal.
Are you certain?
I have never been more certain
of anything in my life.
When I awoke
in discomfort this morning...
I hoped it was just...
a passing cold.
But now I have
to face the truth.
I do not understand why...
but I am beginning to think that
the sphere is...
is triggering
the Kelpien biological
process known as...
Vahar'ai.
It is the event that signals
when Kelpiens are ready to be...
culled for slaughter by...
the Ba'ul,
the predator species
on my homeworld
of Kaminar.
But there are
no Ba'ul here.
It does not matter.
Kelpien ganglia only enflame
in this manner...
as we near our end.
I am a...
a slave to my biology.
We are not gonna let you die.
There has to be something
that we can do.
There is not.
Kelpiens
undergoing Vahar'ai
either die in the culling
or... are driven to madness
by the effects
of Vahar'ai.
Either way,
death is inevitable.
STAMETS: The mycelial entity
has attached itself to Tilly.
We're trying to free her.
Engineering to bridge.
Come in.
Comms are down.
Along with most of the ship.
TILLY:
Don't feel bad.
I know you have to
keep me in quarantine.
Or us.
I feel a
little weird.
I should...
I should be terrified,
but I'm not.
May means me no harm.
Are you able to see May again?
How do you know this is benign?
May was scary,
and she was clingy, and she,
like, never shut up, but...
she never hurt me.
She said she had a plan for me.
She said that I was
her only chance.
Did you ever think
she was manipulating you?
That's what she said youwere
doing-- she said that you...
you were trying to
poison me against her.
Okay, if that thing
wasn't freaking me out, sheis.
The blob seems to be secreting
a psilocybin hallucinogen
to influence her emotions.
RENO:
So you're saying
she's on a bad trip?
Or maybe it's just trying
to calm her down
so she won't be scared.
Or so she won't fight back?
BURNHAM:
If Saru thinks
that somehow the...
the sphere
triggered Vahar'ai,
maybe escaping its grip would
stop what's happening to him.
The problem is
freeing ourselves
before it
destroys the ship.
If it wanted to destroy us,
why the slow attack?
It's inefficient, right?
It must need something.
It's taking what it needs.
Without the computer,
all our primary systems begin to
fail, including the warp core.
The EPS grid's unstable,
and it's cutting off
entire sections,
including Engineering.
Life support's down to 60%,
but who's counting?
It is not logical
for a virus to kill its host.
You're attaching a known medical
diagnosis to an unknown entity.
SARU: There may
be a way to...
slow the virus.
If we can analyze
its properties,
we may be able to develop
digital antibodies.
That could give us back enough
control to break the ship free.
SARU: In theory,
but it will be
a slow process, like...
army ants eating
a water buffalo.
I'm on it.
Going to the science lab.
You will need my help.
PIKE:
Saru, Commander Burnham
can handle this.
There's no reason to risk
your health any further.I...
am dying, Captain...
but I am most
certainly not... dead.
The antibodies
are s-slowing
the virus's progress.
Life support at 47%.
You are wondering
why I kept this from you.
You don't have
to bear it alone.
How...
do I explain...
to the woman
who has fought
over and over for the right
to take her next breath
that I come from a race
that submits?
I'm your friend.
There will never be
judgment between us.
Well, to my shame...
hiding is my nature.
I have learned
multiple languages,
yet never shared my own,
fearful of revealing
my own...
alienness.
May I...
request a favor?
Of course.
Anything.
I have kept
detailed personal logs
since joining Starfleet.
I would ask you...
to officially catalogue them,
so that when...
General Order 1 no longer
applies to the Kelpiens...
they will know
a journey like mine...
is possible.
It would be my privilege.
Did you record your life
before Starfleet?
Uh, you might say
my life began
when I was granted refugee
status by the Federation.
While being processed
at Starbase Seven...
...I saw for the first time
life-forms
from across the universe,
some with less than I had,
yet, with a dream
of something better.
I listened.
Every story I heard...
...created... a space inside me
to feel more, to...
lovemore.
I joined Starfleet
to help those in need
the way I was helped.
You are...
the most empathicsoul...
I know.
There was just one...
painful caveat to my signing up.
I could never return home.
Why?
Oh.
More flashes
of ultraviolet light.
They are... growing
in... strength and frequency.
I'll get something from sickbay.No. No.
I will be fine.
The captain asked you
to return to the bridge
as soon as possible.
I can continue
the work here.
OWOSEKUN: Spock is still
at maximum warp, Captain.
If we're stuck here much longer,
we're going to lose him.
Reallocate power
from the transporters
to long-range sensors.
I don't want to lose contact
with his shuttle.
Even with sensors at max,
we won't be able
to track him for much longer.Contact Engineering.
See if they can reroute
impulse power to the deflectors.
If we can raise shields,
we might be able
to disrupt the stasis field
just enough to break free.
If so, can we
jump away?
Negative, sir.
We don't have enough power
to create the necessary
hull cavitation.
Comms are still down
in Engineering, sir.
Security protocols
are also malfunctioning,
locking off parts
of the ship.
How are we doing, Commander?
The digital antibodies
are doing their job,
but progress is sluggish.
I'm running out of options.
If we lose Spock, we lose
any chance of protecting him.
Permission to go to Engineering.
We can't talk to
them here, but maybe
I can help them
get power to shields.
Permission granted.
What's wrong?The doors won't open,
and that thing reattached
itself to Tilly.Can you detach it?
I could cut it off. She wouldn't
even lose a freckle.
Bad idea.
If it's a symbiote,
removing it might kill her.
Well, thanks for stopping by.
I came to see if we can find a
way to boost power to shields.
No. With the systems
fluctuating,
this section is partitioned off.
We can't get to the warp core.
Michael...
I feel really tired.
What is happening?
That blob is sending her
in and out of consciousness.
Why is it doing that to her?
It's not like we can ask it.
Actually, we can.
This is a harmonic interface.
It-it links my neurons
to the mycelial network.
With modification,
it could link May to Tilly's
central nervous system.
Let May speak
using Tilly's mouth.
Wait. What did you say?
We're gonna talk to it.
We need it to tell
us what it wants.
So do we.
The sphere-- it's been trying
to tell us something,
and we haven't been listening.
Well, damn, woman, go!We got her.
Saru,
could the sphere be
trying to talk to us?
Using the virus as a way
to make first contact?
Yeah. Yes, of course.
I've been so blind.
The ultraviolet wavelengths
are repeating, like...
like letters would in...
in a sentence...
everywhere.
Okay, Saru. Saru, stop.
You're hurting yourself.
No, no. No.
You called me
an "empathic soul,"
and it is true.
My ganglia
respond to shifts
in my environment,
like an early-warning system.
So it is... it is no coincidence
that I started feeling sick
just before...
the sphere engaged us.
Why would...?I know what it is trying to say.
Not first contact, Burnham.
Lastcontact.
I think it came to us to die.
May?
Still me.
RENO:
Signal's piss-poor.
We need to
amplify it.
Cortical implant.
What, you're talking
about trepanation?
Drilling a hole in her skull?
Yeah.
Are you gonna fix her up
with duct tape after?
Maybe.
Commander?
I think she's right.
And I think you think that, too.
Then we do this together.
This is all I had
laying around.
Please tell me
you have a laser scalpel.
No. We're gonna do this
old-school.
We need to sterilize
that drill bit.
First aid kit's over there.
I was able
to raise shields.
We've gained some
ground, but we're still
being held by
the stasis field.
Power levels coming
and going, Captain.
Security reports two dozen crew
still trapped below deck.
Life support failing.
I'm reading an energy buildup
from inside the sphere.
Spiking 10,000 degrees
Kelvin and rising.
Is it powering up weapons?
Reading no
identifiable weapons,
but its internal temperature
is now 20,000 degrees Kelvin.
Divert all non-essential power
to weapons.
Lock on that thing's
radial axis and prepare
to fire photon torpedoes
on my order.
Aye, sir. Arming torpedoes.
SARU: Captain,
hold your fire.
I do not believe
the sphere means us any harm.
All evidence to the contrary.
That thing's about
to destroy us.
It's not destroying
us, Captain.
It's trying to
send us a message.
We received its message.
I'm about to send our reply.
Captain, what if Vahar'ai,
my death process,
was triggered because
the sphere is also dying?
You want to run that
by me again?
We Kelpiens have
a defining trait
hard-wired into our DNA:
empathy.
I can feel the sphere
reaching out,
trying to share something
before it expires.
Sir, I trust Saru's feelings
implicitly.
That sphere didn't
come to attack us.SARU: Captain,
I believe I have discerned
its means of communication.
Detmer,
status on Spock's shuttle?
Exits our sensor range
in six minutes.
Once we lose his
warp signature,
we won't be able
to reacquire it.Set an intercept course.
I want us hauling ass
the second we break free.
Aye, sir.
Keep talking
and make it fast.
What if the sphere
was not attacking
our universal translator,
but attempting
to teach us itslanguage
because it wants
to be remembered,
to preserve its history
using Discovery,
but it cannot unless
we power down and let it in?
That thing snatched us out of
warp and almost gutted the ship.
What if we lower shields,
and that's exactly what it needs
to end us?
Computer, adjust
viewscreen display
to ultraviolet.
That is the light pattern
I have been seeing
everywhere,
repeating again
and again, generated
by the sphere's virus.
Computer, run the light pattern
through the universal
translator.
Captain, I believe
we are looking
at a multitude
of languages
so advanced,
and knowledge so vast
that it simply
overloaded our system.
This sphere is
100,000 years old.
Imagine what it knows,
what it's seen.
Captain, this falls
under Discovery's
original mission
statement
as a science vessel.
STAMETS:
Well, I'll be.
An amplified cortical implant.
Hey, kiddo.
What's your favorite song?
What?
Your favorite song--
sing it for me.
♪ Though I'm past
one hundred thousand miles ♪
BOTH:
♪ I'm feeling very still
♪ And I think my spaceship knows
which way to go ♪
♪ Tell my wife
I love her very much ♪
♪ She knows.
May?
You wanted to talk to me?
Here I am.
What do you want?
Who are you?
I'm from a species
known as the JahSepp.
We lived harmoniously until an
alien intruder began to arrive
at random intervals,
ravaging our ecosystem
irreparably.
So, you came for help
to rid your species
of a destructive alien presence?
Youare the destructive
alien presence.
The-the... the jumps?
Discovery'sjumps?
I broke through the
confines of the network
to reach you,
at great risk.
Risk? You infected
my friend.
You don't belong
inside of her.
You fly the ship from within
the cube, I can reach you.
In Tilly, I found the memory
of May Ahearn, someone I knew
she'd be sympathetic to,
if given a second chance.
Once she trusted May,
I planned to persuade her
to deliver my
message to you.
Oh, I can only ask
for your forgiveness.
I knew better.
I knowbetter.
I'll do whatever it takes
to fix this.
All I ask is
that you let Tilly go.
I can't.
I have other plans for her.
Wrong!Oh. No!
Tilly!
The sphere's
internal temperature
is approaching
ten-to-the-sixth-power Kelvin
and rising.
Our weapons will just
disintegrate in that heat.
Solar temperatures.
A sign of core collapse.
Captain, if we are correct,
once the transmission is
complete, the sphere can die
knowing that it will live on
after it is gone.
We can choose to fulfill
our part in its destiny,
or simply let it fade away
unremembered.
Spock's shuttle is almost
out of sensor range, sir.
Prepare to lower shields.
If this goes south,
overload the warp core
and eject it at the sphere
on my command.
Even at half the distance,
the blast will decimate it.
When it lets go, we divert
all power to shields
and try to ride the shock wave
to a safe distance.
Assuming it doesn't
vaporize us first.
If there's even half a
chance you're correct,
I'm bound by my
oath and conscience
not to let it
vanish forever.
Commanders,
take your stations.
I'll follow your lead.
Lieutenant Detmer,
lower shields.
Aye, sir. Shields down.
SARU:
Bryce,
all channels open.
Owosekun,
divert all computing
resources to Communications.
Yes, Commander.
Here goes nothing.
Transmission is downloading.
All library computers
are processing
at 20% above maximum.
Whatever the sphere is saying,
we're getting all of it.
How long until it blows?Seconds. Power
and energy levels
are off the chart.
Detmer, can you put enough
distance between us in time?
Negative, sir. We're still being
locked by the stasis field.
Transmission complete.Detmer, eject the warp core.
Computer controls
not responding, sir.
Detonation confirmed.
Hard astern. Full impulse now.
SARU:
Ah.
It is so beautiful.
The light is almost like...
music.
Yes, it is.
I'm at a loss as to how
we're still alive to see it.
The sphere's stasis field
reversed polarity
a nanosecond
before detonation...
and pushed us clear.
Its final act was to save us
so we could tell its story.
Hand me the damn torch.
Tilly.
Breathe. Breathe, Tilly.
Breathe.
Breathe, breathe. Slow it down.
Breathe. Come on, you're okay.
You're still you.
Tilly.
Slow. Shh.
Stamets to Burnham.
We got Tilly.
She's okay.
Now it is my turn.
Take me to my quarters, please.
I left home
with a handful of seeds.
Is this from your homeworld?
It is the blossom
that marks the...
the passing of seasons
on Kaminar.
Somewhere along the way,
I... I lost who I was.
So focused on being
the best Kelpien in Starfleet.
Defined by my rank
and uniform...
...until that is all I became.
You are wrong.
Look at what
you've achieved.
You found yourself
among the stars.
You found your bravery.
Your strength.
You've saved so
many lives, Saru.
Including mine.
It is time.
In that first drawer,
you will find a Kelpien knife,
a keepsake I use
to prune my flowers.
I need you
to... to sever my ganglia
and end my suffering.
I need your help
so that I can die now,
peacefully,
before the pain and madness
overtakes me.
Thank you, Michael.
Do we have to do this?
Is it truly inevitable?
I am sorry.
I know how hard
this is for you.
How many people
you've already lost.
I would do it myself, but...
I am too weak.
After all this time...
...after everything that we
have been through together...
...I realize now
that you are my family, Saru.
I feel the same...
about you.
You are the only one
who knows me.
You replaced the sister I had
on Kaminar.
Siranna.
That knife was hers.
I left her
without so much as a good-bye.
You promise me--
no matter how frightening
or painful it may be--
promise me
you will
mend your relationship
with Spock.
If you and I can build
this type of bond,
I'm certain
you can do the same with him.
Please.
I promise.
Good-bye, Michael.
I love you, Saru.
Michael? What is wrong?
I-I bare... I barely touched it.
They fell out
on their own.
I... I, uh...
don't understand.
I should be...
POLLARD: Your vital signs
have returned to normal.
How are you feeling?
I have never felt
this way before.
Fear has always been the
governing principle of my life.
But now...
it is gone.
More than that,
I feel...
...power.
My own power.
Well,
consider yourself certified
for duty, Commander.
Despite speaking 94 languages,
there are times when
words are not enough.
Initial reports
are coming in
from the science teams.
The sphere didn't just give us
its language.
We have recorded everything
it has seen and experienced
the last 100,000 years.
Its legacy.
And your legacy
has a new chapter.
A new and deeply troubling one.
The Kelpien way of life
has always been oriented
toward death
and the role the
Ba'ul play in it.
My people call it
"The Great Balance."
It is our central,
organizing truth.
But you proved it wrong.
Precisely.
And you asked me before
why I could not go home.
It is because I made a promise
to Captain Georgiou
to uphold General Order 1,
not to interfere
with the destiny of my species.
But now,
knowing that what my people
have accepted as the truth
is a lie?
What does this mean for us?
For my species?
My... my planet?
COMPUTER: The war between
the Quaternary star systems
and the Roquar'ri Imperium
lasted a solar cent...
From the sphere?
The computer's translation.
It's like we've found
our galaxy's Dead Sea Scrolls.
Federation scientists will be
studying this for centuries
thanks to you and Saru.
I hope it was worth the cost.
Cost us nothing, sir.
I combed through the
sphere's sensor records
and found the last
thing that it saw:
Spock's shuttle.
I was able to track it
beyond our sensor range.
Conn,
Commander Burnham
is sending you
the coordinates
of Spock's shuttle.
Plot a course,
and don't spare the horses.
DETMER:
Aye, sir.
From now on,
I'll work to keep you clear
about whatever happens
with your brother.
Thank you, Captain, but I have
had a change of heart.
I can't abandon him.
No matter the mistakes
that I've made,
I need my brother to know that
I will always be there for him.
No matter what.
We need to close the
door to the network.
Forever.
Just making
final calculations.
MAY:
Hi, hi. Hello? Hello? It's me.
Did you see that?
See what?May.
She was there,
and then she was gone.
Um...
...you might still be coming
down off your hallucinogen.
No, I swear. I swear.RENO:
Yeah.
No, it's natural to be paranoid
in your condition.Something is not right.
Something's not right.
MAY:
Hello?
Tilly. Hello?
Tilly. Hello, hello...
Wow.
Have you always been
a superior being?
MAY :
Hi. Hello? Hello?
Because...
the harmonics
in your aura...
You know, I was thinking
the exact same thing
about your aura.
What's that dust on your face?
...dust on your face?
It's on yours, too.
STAMETS :
...yours, too.
That tastes like...
RENO:
Psilocybin?
STAMETS:
It dosed us. It dosed us.
Slap me really hard.
Why'd I do that?
To get me focused enough
to find the med kit.
I need to hit us both
with a shot of impedrizine
so we can come down.
Now I need to
give one to Tilly.
Wait a minute. Where is she?
Tilly?
Wait.
Oh, my God,
they took her.
No. No, no, no, no,
no, no, no, no.
Tilly?
No!
Captioning sponsored by
CBS
Captioned by
Media Access Group at WGBH
access.wgbh.org